https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279165/

ABSTRACT

In primary hypoparathyroidism with hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia,
deficient parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion most commonly occurs from
surgical excision of, or damage to, the parathyroid glands. The term idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism describes isolated cases when a cause is not obvious and
there is no family history. However, hypoparathyroidism is also a feature
common to a variety of hereditable syndromes that may present de novo. Familial
isolated hypoparathyroidism may show autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive,
or X-linked inheritance. Genes involved include PTH, SOX3, CASR, GNA11 and
GCM2. Parathyroid hypoplasia is a frequent feature of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome
with involvement of the TBX1 gene. The Hypoparathyroidism, Nerve Deafness, and
Renal Dysplasia syndrome is due to haploinsufficiency of the GATA3 gene.
Antibodies against parathyroid tissue are found in isolated hypoparathyroidism
or combined with other endocrine deficiencies. Antibodies against the CASR
occur in type 1 autoimmune polyglandular syndrome, due to mutations of the AIRE
gene, or in acquired hypoparathyroidism. Disorders characterized by end-organ
resistance to PTH are described collectively by the term
pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) and PHP 1a and PHP 1b are caused by
maternally-inherited changes at the complex imprinted GNAS locus at 20q13.32
that encodes the Gsα protein. Deleterious mutations of the PTHR1 gene show
resistance to PTH and PTHrP and present as Blomstrand lethal chondrodysplasia,
Eiken syndrome, endochondromatosis, and primary failure of tooth eruption.
Calcium and vitamin D are the standard therapy for management of
hypoparathyroidism with hormone replacement [recombinant human PTH(1-84)]
therapy recently becoming an option. Calcilytics, PTH analogs and orally-active
small molecule PTHR1 agonists may, in the future, join the treatment
armamentarium.

PRIMARY HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

Primary hypoparathyroidism is caused by a group of heterogeneous conditions in
which hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia occur as a result of deficient
parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion (1). This most commonly results from
surgical excision of, or damage to, the parathyroid glands. However, autoimmune
disease is also a significant factor in acquired cases, and genetic forms of
hypoparathyroidism due to decreased PTH secretion are not rare (Table 1).

Table 1. Forms of hypoparathyroidism having a genetic basis
Image hypo-pseudo-parathyr_etx-pth-ch9-table1.jpg

The signs and symptoms of hypoparathyroidism include evidence of latent or
overt neuromuscular hyperexcitability due to hypocalcemia (Table 2). The effect
may be aggravated by hyperkalemia or hypomagnesemia, but there is wide
variation in the severity of symptoms. Patients may complain of circumoral
numbness, paresthesias of the distal extremities or muscle cramping which can
progress to carpopedal spasm or tetany. Laryngospasm or bronchospasm and
seizures may also occur. Other less specific manifestations include fatigue,
irritability, and personality disturbance. A comprehensive list of features
associated with hypocalcemia can be found in the Endotext chapter,
“Hypocalcemia: diagnosis and treatment” by Schafer & Shoback (3).

Severe hypocalcemia may be associated with a prolonged QTc interval on
electrocardiography, which reverses with treatment. More extensive
cardiomyopathic changes may be seen. These include chest pain, elevated enzymes
(CPK), left ventricular impairment, and T-wave inversion, suggestive of a
myocardial infarction (4,5). Patients with chronic hypocalcemia may have
calcification of the basal ganglia or more widespread intracranial
calcification, detected by skull X-ray or CT scan. Also seen are extrapyramidal
neurological symptoms (more often with intracranial calcification), subcapsular
cataracts, band keratopathy, and abnormal dentition.

Table 2. Some clinical features of hypocalcemia Table 2 Clinical features of
hypocalcemia

    Neuromuscular irritability
    Paresthesias
    Laryngospasm
    Bronchospasm
    Tetany
    Seizures
    Chvostek sign
    Trousseau sign
    Prolonged Q-T interval on ECG

Increased neuromuscular irritability may be demonstrated by eliciting a
Chvostek or Trousseau sign. A positive Chvostek sign is a prolonged reflex
contraction of the facial muscle in response to a digital tap on the cheek just
anterior to the ear. As with other hyperreflexias, up to 20% of normal
individuals may demonstrate a slight positive reaction. A positive Trousseau
sign is carpopedal spasm induced by inflation of a blood pressure cuff covering
the upper arm to 20 mm Hg above systolic blood pressure for three minutes. This
response reflects the heightened irritability of nerves undergoing pressure
ischemia.

In hypoparathyroidism, serum calcium concentrations are decreased and serum
phosphate levels are increased. Serum PTH is low or undetectable. (The
important exception is PTH resistance, discussed further below.) Usually, serum
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D) is low, but alkaline phosphatase activity
is normal. Despite an increase in fractional excretion of calcium, intestinal
calcium absorption and bone resorption are both suppressed. The renal filtered
load of calcium is decreased, and the 24-h urinary calcium excretion is
reduced; nephrogenous cyclic AMP excretion is low and renal tubular
reabsorption of phosphate is elevated.

The terms idiopathic or isolated hypoparathyroidism have been traditionally
used to describe isolated cases of glandular hypofunction when a cause is not
obvious and there is no family history. However, hypoparathyroidism is a
feature common to a variety of heritable syndromes that may present de novo.
Hypoparathyroidism can occur because of a congenital hypoplasia/aplasia with or
without other congenital anomalies such as dysmorphic facies, immunodeficiency,
lymphedema, nephropathy, nerve deafness or cardiac malformation. Thus, in
patients with hypoparathyroidism of uncertain onset, a careful examination of
craniofacial features and assessment of endocrine, cardiac and renal systems
should be performed to exclude a syndromic cause. Similarly, autoimmune
hypoparathyroidism can occur as an isolated endocrine condition or with other
glandular deficiencies in a pluriglandular autoimmune syndrome, requiring
attention to multi-organ endocrine dysfunction.

A significant number of patients with idiopathic hypoparathyroidism and
hypercalciuria, but no other anomalies may be found to have de novo activating
mutations of the CASR gene. Because of the implications for treatment, CASR
molecular screening of patients with this presentation is recommended (6,7).
Familial Isolated Hypoparathyroidism

Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism (FIH) may show autosomal dominant,
autosomal recessive, or X-linked inheritance.

In a few instances of autosomal dominant disease, a mutation in the PTH gene
(MIM# 168450 (8) - http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=OMIM) has
been found. In one family, a missense mutation (C18R) in the signal sequence of
the preproPTH precursor has been identified (9) and the mutant shown to be
defective in vitro in processing preproPTH to proPTH, although, as patients had
one normal gene copy, the autosomal dominant mode of inheritance remained
unexplained. Then, further studies in transfected cells showed that the mutant
was trapped in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) promoting ER stress and apoptosis
(10). In a family with autosomal recessive hypoparathyroidism, a different,
homozygous, signal sequence mutation (S23P) segregates with affected status
(11). This mutation may prevent proper cleavage of the signal peptide during
processing of the nascent protein. In a girl with isolated hypoparathyroidism,
a homozygous S23X signal sequence mutation was found predicting a truncated
inactive PTH peptide (12). However, the circulating PTH level was not
undetectable, suggesting some translational readthrough of the mutant preproPTH
mRNA. A homozygous [Cys25]PTH(1-84) mutation that impairs PTHR1 activation was
identified in an idiopathic hypoparathyroid family (13). Elevated circulating
PTH levels were found in some (but not all) assays thus defining a novel form
of hypoparathyroidism. In another family with autosomal recessive
hypoparathyroidism, a donor splice site mutation at the exon 2/intron 2
junction of the PTH gene was identified (14). The mutation leads to exon
skipping and loss of exon 2 containing the initiation codon and signal sequence
of preproPTH mRNA. The SOX3 gene encodes a transcriptional factor likely
involved in the embryonic development of the parathyroid gland (15). In two
multigeneration families with X-linked recessive hypoparathyroidism exhibiting
neonatal onset of hypocalcemia and parathyroid agenesis, the trait was mapped
to a 906-kb region on distal Xq27 that contains three genes including SOX3 but
no intragenic mutations were found (MIM# 307700). An interstitial
deletion-insertion involving chromosomes 2p25.3 and Xq27.1, was found
downstream of SOX3 and was speculated to exert a positional effect on SOX3
expression (16).

Gain-of-function mutations in the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) gene
(MIM#601199) have been identified in a number of families clinically diagnosed
with autosomal dominant hypocalcemia type 1 (ADH1 – MIM#515361) (17,18). In the
parathyroid gland, the activated CASR suppresses PTH secretion and in the
kidney, it induces hypercalciuria that may contribute to the hypocalcemia. In
many cases of ADH1, the family history is positive, but de novo mutations are
quite common (19,20). Mosaicism for de novo mutation in an otherwise healthy
parent has been described (21), and may explain some cases of apparently
recessive disease. Most importantly, there are implications for counseling
parents about risks of recurrence.

Almost all of the activating mutations are missense and appear almost equally
divided between the amino-terminal third of the extracellular domain (ECD) and
the transmembrane domain (TMD). Of special interest is the cluster of ECD
mutations (A116T to C131W) that cause an increase in receptor sensitivity to
extracellular calcium, suggesting that this region is critical for receptor
activation. This cluster overlaps the two cysteine residues –cys-129 and
cys-131– involved in the interface of the mature protein dimer (22). Further
details can be found in the locus-specific database
–http://data.mch.mcgill.ca/casrdb/ (23) and (24).

Although Bartter syndrome subtype V is represented by only a handful of cases
with heterozygous severe activating mutations in the CASR (MIM#601199), it
provides additional insight into the functioning of the CaSR in the thick
ascending limb (TAL) of the nephron (25-27). Bartter syndrome encompasses a
heterogeneous group of electrolyte homeostasis disorders, the common features
of which are hypokalemic alkalosis, hyperreninemia, and hyperaldosteronism.
Bartter syndrome subtypes I–IV are autosomal recessive disorders due to
inactivating mutations in the following ion transporters or channels active in
the TAL: type I, the sodium potassium-chloride cotransporter (NKCC2); type II,
the outwardly rectifying potassium channel (ROMK); type III, the voltage-gated
chloride channel (CLC-Kb); type IV, Barttin, a chloride channel beta-subunit
that is required for trafficking of CLC-Ka and CLC-Kb. Patients with the
autosomal dominant Bartter syndrome subtype V have, in addition to the classic
features of the syndrome, hypocalcemia, and may exhibit neuromuscular
manifestations, seizures, and basal ganglia calcifications. NKCC2 and ROMK in
the apical membrane (luminal side) of the TAL have been proposed to generate a
transepithelial electrochemical gradient that drives passive paracellular
transport of Na+, Mg2+, and Ca2+ from the lumen to blood (28). The CASR is
situated in the basolateral membrane (antiluminal side) and when activated
increases 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid and decreases cAMP concentrations,
both of which would inhibit ROMK and NKCC2 activities (28,29). Thus, severe
activating mutations of the CASR lead to the salt wasting of Bartter syndrome
in addition to the hypercalciuric hypocalcemia of ADH1.

Heterozygous gain-of-function missense mutations of GNA11 have been identified
in ADH patients without detectable CASR activating mutations (30-33). The GNA11
activating mutations increase the sensitivity of the parathyroid gland and
renal tubule to extracellular calcium concentrations. Autosomal dominant
hypocalcemia and hypoparathyroidism due to CASR and GNA11 mutations are now
designated as ADH type 1 (MIM#601198) and type 2 (MIM#615361) respectively. The
human Gα11 protein (a Gq family member – MIM#139313) has 359 amino acids with
an α-helical domain in the NH2-terminal region, a GTPase domain in the
COOH-terminal region, and three switch regions (SR1-3) in the middle portion
that change conformation based on whether GTP or GDP is bound (34). The R80C,
R181Q, S211W, F341L, and V304M mutations found in hypocalcemic individuals are
predicted by 3D modeling to alter the normal Gα11 protein structure. Moreover,
cells stably expressing the CASR and transfected with the mutants exhibit
increased sensitivity to changes in extracellular calcium (30-33).

Inactivating mutations in the CASR regulator, the adaptor protein 2 sigma
subunit encoded by the AP2S1 gene, cause familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
type 3 (35). The search for activating mutations in AP2S1 in familial and
sporadic isolated hypoparathyroid patients negative for CASR or GNA11 mutations
that would represent an additional genetic cause of ADH has thus far been
negative (36,37).

Recessively inherited FIH may occur with mutations of the glial cells missing-2
gene (GCM2; MIM#603716). The GCM2 gene localizes to chromosome 6p24.2 and
encodes a transcription factor. It is expressed in the PTH-secreting cells of
the developing parathyroid glands and is critical for their development in
terrestrial vertebrates (38-40). A patient with neonatal hypoparathyroidism was
found to be homozygous for a partial deletion acquired from both parents (41),
and a pair of siblings with homozygous mutations has been reported (42).
Additional studies have identified inactivating GCM2 mutations in cases with
autosomal recessive FIH (43,44). On the other hand, heterozygous mutations that
cause dominant-negative GCM2 mutants have also been identified in patients with
autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (43,45,46). Additional recessive and
dominant GCM2 mutations have been noted in this gene that continues to be
expressed in the adult parathyroid [see (47)]. Nevertheless, it appears that
the prevalence of genetic defects affecting GCM2 function is not high in
isolated hypoparathyroidism, as a recent study investigating 20 unrelated cases
with this disorder (10 familial and 10 sporadic) failed to identify any GCM2
mutations segregating with the disease and/or leading to loss of function (48).
Of further interest is that a genetic variant, Y282D that demonstrates
significantly enhanced transcriptional activity relative to wild-type GCM2
associates with hyperparathyroidism in some cohorts of the sporadic primary
disorder (49). Most recently, novel heterozygous active GCM2 variants that
segregate with affected status in some kindreds with familial isolated
hyperparathyroidism have been described (50). Thus, like CASR and GNA11, both
gain-of-function and loss-of-function variants of GCM2 may contribute to
calcemic disorders.  Hypoparathyroidism with Syndromic Features

Hypoparathyroidism due to parathyroid hypoplasia is a frequent feature of
22q11.2 microdeletions, the most common cause of DiGeorge syndrome 1 (DS1;
MIM#188400) (51,52). This syndrome complex arises from a failure of the third
and fourth pharyngeal pouches to develop, leading to agenesis or congenital
hypoplasia of the parathyroid glands, thymus, and the anterior heart field.
Patients with DS1 may typically present with neonatal hypocalcemic seizures due
to hypoparathyroidism, severe infections due to thymic hypoplasia, and
conotruncal heart defects (53). Because a microdeletion is involved, the
identification of novel developmental genes in the 22q11 region has been keenly
pursued. One of the genes is TBX1, encoding a DNA-binding transcription factor
of the T-box family known to have important roles in vertebrate and
invertebrate organogenesis and pattern formation (54,55). Mouse models with
Tbx1 haploinsufficiency established the essential contribution of this factor
to conotruncal development (56), and placed it in developmental context during
organogenesis (57,58). However, while the Tbx1 null mutant mice had all the
developmental anomalies of DS1 – thymic and parathyroid hypoplasia, abnormal
facial structures and cleft palate, skeletal defects and cardiac outflow
abnormalities – Tbx1 haploinsufficiency in mice was associated with only
defects of the fourth pharyngeal pouch responsible for the cardiac outflow
abnormalities (59). cDNA microarray analyses of mice lacking Tbx1 have
identified Gcm2 as one of the downregulated genes in the pharyngeal region,
indicating that Tbx1 is upstream of Gcm2 (60). Furthermore, as Tbx1 is
regulated by sonic hedgehog (Shh) (61), a Shh-Tbx1-Gcm2 parathyroid
developmental pathway is indicated.

The basis for the phenotypic differences between DGS1 patients who are
heterogeneous for TBX1 loss and the Tbx1+/- mice is unclear but could reflect a
species-specific gene dosage requirement together with roles of downstream
genes regulated by Tbx1. Some patients may have late-onset DGS1 and develop
symptomatic hypocalcemia in childhood or later with only subtle phenotypic
abnormalities (62,63). Of note is that the age of diagnosis in rare families
with DGS1 patients having TBX1 inactivating (missense or frameshift) mutations
ranged from 7 to 46 years in keeping with late-onset DGS1 (54).

The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) encompasses a wider spectrum of
clinical conditions that includes isolated congenital heart disease and
velocardiofacial (VCF) syndrome (64). Associated craniofacial abnormalities
include cleft palate, pharyngeal insufficiency and mildly dysmorphic facies. In
the VCF syndrome, anatomical anomalies of the pharynx are prominent and
hypernasal speech due to abnormal pharyngeal musculature with or without cleft
palate is typical. In most patients, some degree of intellectual deficit is
present and there is strong predisposition to psychiatric illness
(schizophrenia or bipolar disorder) in adolescents and adults (65,66). Further
information, both clinical and educational, can be found at web sites
specifically devoted to this condition [see (67)].

The 22q11.2DS is due to one of the most common microdeletions (1 in 4000 live
births), and it may go clinically unrecognized in its milder or variant forms.
Most cases with hypoparathyroidism (~50% of cases) are the result of de novo
deletion through meiotic non-allelic homologous recombination, and driven by a
unique cluster of low copy repeats designated LCR22 A-H [see (67,68)]. Most
commonly (~85% of cases), a deletion of ~3 Mb is found, encompassing proximal
repeats A to D. Many of the others (~10% of cases) involve atypical nested
deletions including those spanning LCR22 A to B. Thus LSR22 A to B, which
includes the TBX1 gene, is the primary site contributing to parathyroid
dysgenesis. Detailed characterization and long-term follow-up for the
hypoparathyroid component of this disorder is ongoing.

Although most cases of DiGeorge syndrome are sporadic, as mentioned above
autosomal dominant inheritance is not unknown. In utero influences may be
important determinants of the clinical picture, since there are instances of
monozygotic twins with discordant phenotypes (69-71). Phenocopies occur with
diabetic embryopathy, fetal alcohol syndrome, and retinoid embryopathy. In rare
instances, it has been shown that a phenotypically normal parent can transmit a
microdeletion to an offspring. Such parents have been found to carry a
duplication of the 22q11 on the second chromosome, and the combination of
duplication and deletion alleles in a parent generates a balanced state, termed
“gene dosage compensation” (72-73).

Although the hypoparathyroidism affects about half of all carriers, it is
usually not severe, and frequently treatment following neonatal hypocalcemia
can be tapered or stopped in older children. However, the hypoparathyroidism
may also remain asymptomatic until adolescence or emerge at times of stress,
such as corrective cardiac surgery or severe infection, suggesting that
continued surveillance of parathyroid gland reserve is important. (74-76).

Traditionally, diagnosis of 22q11.2DS is established with specific cytogenetic
studies -- usually with locus-specific fluorescence in-situ hybridization
(FISH) testing. These tests will pick up many of the larger common deletions
that involve regions of low-copy number repeats (LCRs). However, specific
chromosomal array-based and MLPA analyses are now preferred, as they have been
shown to have increased sensitivity for smaller deletions (67). Recently, the
diagnostic power of next generation sequencing has been harnessed to identify
almost all of the microdeletions underlying sporadic and inherited forms of the
disorder (64). Non-invasive prenatal screening and pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis) are also clinically available (77). Because the clinical picture is
so variable and the prevalence so high, testing for 22q11.2 microdeletion
should be considered in the workup for any new hypoparathyroid case for which
another cause is not found. Finally, distinct genetic defects can coexist with
22q11.2DS as exemplified by the finding of concurrence of this syndrome in an
adolescent with longstanding hypercalcemia who had familial hypocalciuric
hypercalcemia type 3 due to an AP2S1 mutation (78).

Clinicians will also want to be aware that a small but significant minority
(~10%) of patients will have associated autoimmune disease, driven in part,
perhaps, by the thymus-based defect in T cell function (64,79). Among the more
common (non-endocrine) conditions are arthritis, celiac disease and autoimmune
hematologic disease, particularly idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Autoimmune thyroid disease, with either hypo- or hyperparathyroid states, has
been reported (79,80), and serum TSH assay should be measured regularly. It has
been suggested that the later-onset hypoparathyroid disease may be partly
autoimmune in origin, not developmental. A survey of 59 Norwegian patients
showed discordance of adult onset disease with neonatal hypoparathyroidism, but
a significant correlation with parathyroid autoantibodies and the presence of
autoimmune disease (79).

The clinical features of DiGeorge syndrome including hypoparathyroidism also
occur with other cytogenetic abnormalities, notably chromosome 10p
haploinsufficiency (81,82). Deletions of two non-overlapping regions of
chromosome 10p contribute to DiGeorge syndrome 2; DS2 at 10p13-14 (83), and the
Barakat or HDR (Hypoparathyroidism, Nerve Deafness, and Renal Dysplasia)
syndrome (MIM#146255) (84,85) at 10p14-10pter (66,87). The latter is due to
haploinsufficiency of GATA3 (MIM#131320), which encodes a dual zinc finger
transcription factor (88) that is essential for normal embryonic development of
the parathyroids, auditory system, and kidney. Since the original description,
several additional GATA3 loss-of-function mutations have been described in HDR
patients [e.g., (89-92)]. Heterozygous Gata3-deficient mice develop parathyroid
abnormalities as revealed by challenge with a diet low in calcium and vitamin D
that are due to dysregulation of the parathyroid-specific transcription factor,
Gcm2. Gata3-/- embryos at E12.5 lack Gcm2 expression and have gross defects in
the fourth pharyngeal pouches, including absent parathyroid/thymus primordia
(93). GATA3 transactivates the GCM2 promoter and with GCM2 forms part of a
transcriptional cascade essential for the differentiation and survival of
parathyroid progenitor cells.

In another congenital disorder, Kenny-Caffey syndrome, hypoparathyroidism is
found variably associated with the typical picture of growth retardation,
osteosclerosis, cortical thickening of the long bones, and delayed closure of
the anterior fontanel (94-97). The original description of the syndrome was of
the autosomal dominant form now identified as KCS-2 (MIM#127000) that is caused
by heterozygous mutations in the FAM111A gene (98-100). The full functions of
FAM111A and how mutations in it cause the disorder are unclear. FAM111A has
some homology to peptidases, and is involved with chromatin structure during
DNA replication (101). KS-2 is allelic to the lethal disorder,
osteocraniostenosis (OCS, MIM#6023611). Hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism
was found in some OCS patients who survived the perinatal period (97).

A recessively inherited form of Kenny-Caffey syndrome (KCS-1, MIM#244460) was
noted to be similar to the recessive Sanjad-Sakati syndrome (MIM#241410)
characterized by congenital hypoparathyroidism, seizures, growth and
developmental retardation and characteristic dysmorphic features, including
deep set eyes, depressed nasal bridge with beaked nose, long philtrum, thin
upper lip, micrognatia and large, floppy ear lobes. Radiographs showed
medullary stenosis reminiscent of Kenny-Caffey syndrome (97,102). Linkage
studies localized the recessive KCS-1 and Sanjad-Sakati syndromes to 1q42-43,
and causative mutations in the tubulin chaperone E, TBCE, gene were identified
in what is now known as Hypoparathyroidism, Retardation and Dysmorphism (HRD)
syndrome (97,103,104). This highlighted the role of TBCE that binds
microtubules and proteasomes and protects against misfolded stress (105) in
parathyroid development (106).  Hypoparathyroidism due to Metabolic Disease

Hypoparathyroidism is also a variable component of the neuromyopathies caused
by mitochondrial gene defects (107). Among these are the Kearns-Sayre syndrome
(ophthalmoplegia, retinal degeneration, and cardiac-conduction defects)
(MIM#530000), the Pearson marrow pancreas syndrome (lactic acidosis,
neutropenia, sideroblastic anemia, and pancreatic exocrine dysfunction) (108)
(MIM#557000) and mitochondrial encephalomyopathy (MIM#540000). The molecular
defects range from large deletions and duplications of the mitochondrial
genomes in a large number of tissues (109,110) to single base-pair mutations in
one of the transfer RNA genes found only in a restricted range of cell types
(MIM#590050). The role of these mitochondrial mutations in the pathogenesis of
hypoparathyroidism remains to be clarified. However, mutations in HADHB, that
encodes the β-subunit of mitochondrial trifunctional protein, cause infantile
onset hypoparathyroidism and peripheral polyneuropathy (111).

Long-chain hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency (MIM#600890) is an
inborn error of oxidative fatty acid metabolism that may be accompanied by
hypoparathyroidism (112). Whether the parathyroid disease is directly related
to the enzyme deficiency or secondary to the accompanying mitochondrial disease
needs further study.

Parathyroid insufficiency and symptoms of hypocalcemia are occasionally seen in
inherited metabolic disorders leading to excess storage of iron (thalassemia,
Diamond-Blackfan anemia, hemochromatosis) or copper (Wilson disease) (113). In
most instances, there is similar dysfunction in other endocrine glands, and the
parathyroid disease is usually mild. Nonetheless, recognition of the
hypoparathyroid state may help explain otherwise non-specific symptoms and aid
in overall management of these multisystem diseases.

Autoimmune Hypoparathyroidism: Acquired and Inherited Disorders

Antibodies directed against parathyroid tissue have been detected in up to 38%
of patients with isolated hypoparathyroid disease, and over 40% of patients
having hypoparathyroidism combined with other endocrine deficiencies (114,115).
Subsequently, a survey of a parathyroid expression library led to the
identification of one protein selectively associated with the autoimmune
process, the NACHT leucine-rich-repeat protein 5 (NALP5). Elevated antibody
titres occur in half the patients with autoimmune hypoparathyroidism, with or
without other autoimmune disease, but uncommonly in other conditions without
hypoparathyroidism. (115,116).

Antibodies against the extracellular domain of the parathyroid CASR were
originally reported in more than half of patients with either type 1 autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome (APS-1, also known as autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy or APECED), MIM# 240300,
(117) or acquired hypoparathyroidism associated with autoimmune hypothyroidism
(118). This finding was confirmed in a subsequent study of 51 cases of
idiopathic hypoparathyroidism, but there was a 13% positive rate in controls
(119). Other studies of APS-1 patients have also identified elevated CASR
antibodies in some cases but at a lower frequency (120-122). Although some have
suggested that CASR antibody assays are clinically indicated in acquired
hypoparathyroidism (123), it remains to be seen whether the autoantibodies are
of primary or secondary importance (115,124). There is now good evidence that
autoantibodies can be functional activators of CASR and thereby could induce
hypoparathyroidism. While presently there may not be a convenient clinical test
for this, patient sera have been demonstrated to activate the CASR transfected
into HEK cells in vitro (125). In some hypoparathyroid patients, both
autoimmune parathyroid destruction and suppression by CASR activation may
co-exist (126).

In APS-1, the most common associated manifestations are hypoparathyroidism with
mucocutaneous candidiasis and Addison's disease. Additional features include
pernicious anemia, chronic active hepatitis, alopecia, keratitis, gonadal
failure, thyroid disease, pancreatic insufficiency and diabetes mellitus (117).
The phenotype is highly variable and patients may not express all elements of
the basic triad, leading to the suggestion that the criteria used for molecular
screening be relaxed (126,127). The disease usually presents in infancy with
chronic oral thrush, followed by hypoparathyroidism in the first decade, and
then adrenocortical failure in the third. Interestingly, there is nearly 100%
penetrance of hypoparathyroidism in females, but less than 60% in males, even
though the adrenal hypofunction affects both sexes equally (121). Moreover,
patients who develop the adrenal hypofunction first are less likely to be male
and may never develop hypoparathyroidism. The responsible gene, called the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE), maps to chromosome 21q22 and encodes a
transcriptional regulator (128-130). In the absence of AIRE protein,
tissue-specific self-antigens are not expressed in the thymus and multiorgan
autoimmunity develops, because negative selection of the T cells bearing the
autoantigens is disrupted (131). Many patients with APS-1 can be shown to have
autosomal recessive inheritance of the AIRE defect. In families with autosomal
recessive mutations of AIRE, obligate heterozygotes may also have common
autoimmune disorders but APECED is not seen (132). A phenocopy leading to
acquired APS-1 may occur when the AIRE gene is silenced by thymic neoplasia
(133). APS-1 has been associated with more than 300 mutations of the AIRE gene,
and updates can be found in the online mutation database
(https://grenada.lumc.nl/LOVD2/mendelian_genes/home.php?select_db=AIRE).  Go
to: PARATHYROID RESISTANCE SYNDROMES

Pseudohypoparathyroidism

Several clinical disorders characterized by end-organ resistance to PTH have
been described collectively by the term pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP)
(134-137). They are associated with hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and
increased circulating PTH. Target tissue unresponsiveness to the hormone
manifests as a lack of increased phosphate excretion and, in some cases, cAMP
excretion in response to PTH administration (138). The biochemical
characteristics of the different forms of PHP are contrasted with those of
hypoparathyroidism in Table 3.

Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy

Fuller Albright first recognized that the likely cause of the hypoparathyroid
state in PHP is a constitutive absence of target tissue responsiveness (139).
In many patients, the end-organ resistance is accompanied by a specific pattern
of physical findings, called Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO;
MIM#300800). Typically, patients have short stature, round facies,
brachydactyly, obesity, and ectopic soft tissue or dermal ossification(s)
(osteoma cutis) (Figure 1). In the calvaria, this may manifest as hyperostosis
frontalis interna (134). Intracranial calcification(s), cataracts and band
keratopathy, subcutaneous calcifications, and dental hypoplasia are also common
but are likely the consequences of longstanding hypoparathyroid hypocalcemia
(Table 4, see below Figure 1). The brachydactyly may be asymmetric or not, and
may involve one or both hands or feet, but the pattern is quite distinctive
(140,141). The shortening tends to involve the first distal phalanx, with a
thumbnail (or first toenail) that is wider than it is long. The fourth and
fifth metacarpals (or metatarsals) are frequently shortened out of proportion
to the others and the second metacarpal is often spared. Radiographic analysis
of the hands (pattern profiling) may be helpful in assessment of the
brachydactyly (Figure 1) (142).  Image hypo-pseudo-parathyr_figure2.jpg

Figure 1.Features of Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy (AHO). [A] Young woman
with short stature (~ 3rd centile), disproportionate shortening of the limbs,
generalized obesity, and round, flattened face. [B] Radiograph of the hand
showing the shortened 4th and 5th metacarpals. [C] Fist with the characteristic
'dimples' over the 3rd, 4th, and 5th digits replacing the knuckles formed by
the distal head of normally sized metacarpal bones (Archibald sign). [D]
Brachydactyly of the hand, with the short 4th and 5th digits, the greatly
foreshortened terminal 1st digit, and very short, wide thumbnail (potter's
thumb). (Reproduced from Levine, 2000, with permission).

Although affected patients are generally short as adults, their bone age as
children may be advanced and growth accelerated (142). Patients with AHO are
probably predisposed to hypertension (143), conductive and sensorineural
hearing loss (134,144), cord compression due to spinal anomalies (145), and
movement disorders due to basal ganglia calcification (146). The features of
AHO may be subtle in infancy or early childhood; in a few, there is little to
see even in adulthood. The round facies, short neck, and low, flat nasal bridge
are often accompanied by central obesity (147). A study showed that the obesity
phenotype occurs primarily in those patients who also have multiple hormone
resistance, i.e., PHP1a (see below), and according to data from mice, a
hypothalamic mechanism, rather than hypothyroidism, is the primary underlying
cause (148).

Patients with brachydactyly, mental retardation, and other features closely
resembling AHO have been found to carry microdeletions of chromosome 2q37;
brachydactyly-mental retardation, BDMR; MIM#600430 (149). Genes important for
skeletal and neurological development lie within this region.
Haploinsufficiency of HDAC4 (MIM#605314), encoding a histone deacetylase that
regulates gene expression during the development of many tissues including the
bone, is responsible for the brachydactyly and the mental retardation in those
patients (150). Isolated brachydactyly type E (BDE, MIM#113300) has been
associated in sporadic cases with mutations in HOX13 (MIM#168470) (151) and
mutations in the PTHLH gene (MIM#168470) on 12p11.2 that encodes PTHrP have
been implicated. In one family with autosomal BDE a cis-regulatory site
downregulates PTHLH in translocation t(8;12)(q13;p11.2) and downregulates its
targets ADAMTS-7 and ADAMTS-12 leading to impaired chondrogenic differentiation
(152). Affected individuals of one large family with BDE, short stature, and
learning difficulties had an ~900 bp microdeletion encompassing PTHLH (153).
Additional individuals with BDE and short stature from other different kindreds
were found to have PTHLH missense, nonstop, and nonsense mutations (153).
Different translocations affecting chromosome 12p have also been identified in
two families with BDE, leading to increased abundance of a long noncoding RNA
on chromosome 12q, which regulates the expression of PTHLH in cis and of the
SOX9 gene located on chromosome 17q in trans (154). BDE is associated with
hypertension in some cases, in which the disease is inherited in an autosomal
dominant manner (termed HTNB). Missense mutations in PDE3A, a gene encoding a
cAMP/cGMP phosphodiesterase, have been recently found in several unrelated
families with HTNB. These mutations cause increased cAMP hydrolytic activity
and thus lead to diminished cAMP signaling (155). Some patients with AHO-like
features have been described, who also showed platelet Gs hypofunction. Those
patients were found to have IGF2 hypermethylation and SNURF hypomethylation, as
well as imprinting defects within GNAS, the gene encoding the stimulatory G
protein alpha-subunit (Gsα; see below) (156).  Go to: PHP1a

PHP1a patients, characterized by AHO, PTH resistance, and evidence of target
organ resistance to other hormones, are usually found to have a reduction in
the activity of the Gsα subunit, which is part of the membrane associated
heterotrimeric G-protein complex - transducing signals between G-protein
coupled receptors and adenylate cyclase (157-159). Adenylyl cyclase catalyzes
the synthesis of the second messenger cAMP, and therefore, PHP-1a patients tend
to have a deficiency in cAMP generation, particularly in certain tissues. As
explained above, this deficiency is clearly evident when measuring cAMP
excretion in response to PTH administration.

The GNAS gene (MIM#168470) encoding the Gsα protein maps to 20q13.2-13.3 and
has at least 4 alternative transcriptional start sites (Figure 2) and an
antisense transcript, GNAS-AS1 (160). The three upstream exons and the
preceding promoter regions are genetically imprinted, i.e., methylated in an
allele specific manner. The promoter of the Gsα transcript, which uses exon 1,
is unmethylated. Unlike the other alternative GNAS products, Gsα expression is
biallelic except in a small set of tissues, where Gsα is derived predominantly
from the maternal allele (161-164). This tissue-specific monoallelic Gsα
expression affects penetrance of the PHP phenotype. The maternal transmission
of the hormone resistance in PHP1a (165) can be explained by silencing of the
paternal Gsα allele, which would otherwise allow expression of 50% of Gsα
protein (166). Thus, full expression of a coding GNAS mutation, which occurs in
maternally transmitted cases, leads to AHO plus hormone resistance (PHP1a),
whereas a paternally transmitted mutation causes AHO alone
(pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism; PPHP). Despite clinical evidence supporting
imprinting in portions of the kidney tubule, it has been difficult to confirm
this experimentally in humans (167). The imprinting of GNAS is complex and
involves multiple differentially methylated regions (DMR) (160). Moreover, it
is tissue-specific and may vary with developmental stage (168,169), although
key imprinting of the 1A (also referred to as A/B) DMR is thought to be a
primary event that occurs during gametogenesis and is maintained thereafter
(170). Ablation of the Gsα ortholog in mice (Gnas) has confirmed that maternal,
but not paternal, transmission of the deleted allele results in PTH resistance.
The homozygous deletion of Gnas is embryonic lethal (161). Comparison of Gsα
expression in mice with maternally vs paternally disrupted Gsα expression also
demonstrated that Gsα expression is predominantly maternal in the renal cortex,
but not in renal medulla (161). PTH resistance is delayed until after infancy
in most PHP1a patients, and exon 1A imprinting may not be evident in the fetus
(167). Indeed, a study using mice demonstrated that the silencing of the
paternal Gsα allele develops postnatally (171).  Figure 2. Simplified view of
the GNAS region and its transcripts.  Figure 2

Simplified view of the GNAS region and its transcripts. The normal
allele-specific methylation and expression patterns of the four alternate first
exons of GNAS which splice onto exon 2 to produce transcripts encoding NESP55,
XLαs, a transcript of unknown function (1A; also known as A/B), and Gsα (which
uses exon 1). NESP55 and XLαs promoters are oppositely imprinted: NESP55 is
expressed from the maternal allele and its promoter region is methylated on the
paternal allele, whereas XLαs is expressed from the paternal allele and its
promoter is methylated on the maternal allele. Gsα is paternally silenced in
some tissues e.g., renal proximal tubule cells, indicated by the dashed arrow.
NESP55 protein is unrelated to Gsα, and its entire coding region is located
within its first exon. In contrast, XLαs and Gsα proteins have identical
COOH-terminal domains (encoded by exons 2-13), while their unique NH2-terminal
domains are encoded within their respective first exons. Exon 1A does not have
a translational start site, but is transcriptionally active. Loss of exon 1A
imprinting (methylation) is associated with decreased Gsα expression in renal
proximal tubules and some other hormone-responsive tissues, and is the typical
cause of PHP1b. (figure from Liu et al., 2000, with permission).

A variety of inactivating mutations in the portion of the GNAS gene encoding
Gsα have been identified in PHP1a patients (141,172-176). The spectrum includes
missense mutations, point mutations impairing efficient and accurate splicing,
and small insertion/deletion mutations. The 4bp deletion in exon 7 (DGACT
188/190) has been observed in multiple unrelated cases, suggesting that this
may be a hot spot (136,176). Several other mutations have also been observed in
more than one kindred, indicating that additional susceptibility regions may
exist. The identification of de novo germline mosaicism (177) is consistent
with the view that most sporadic cases harbor new mutations, but the separation
of such sporadic cases from familial ones, in which there is suppression of
phenotype due to imprinting, may be difficult without detailed molecular
studies.

PHP1a cases have been described in which no mutations of the GNAS gene have
been found by nucleotide sequence analysis of exons encoding Gsα. This may be
because the mutation is in a regulatory region of the gene not yet examined, or
it may be that a large deletion prevents amplification of the mutant allele for
subsequent analyses. In cases without identified GNAS coding mutations, an
assessment of Gsα bioactivity in erythrocytes is helpful in ruling out
regulatory region mutations or large deletions. A 35 kb deletion spanning exons
1 through 5 has been identified by using comparative genome hybridization in a
patient with PHP1a in whom coding mutations had been ruled out but a marked
reduction of erythrocyte Gsα activity demonstrated (178,179). Typically, PHP1a
is associated with multiple hormone resistance, including thyroid stimulating
hormone (TSH) and gonadotropins, causing hypothyroidism and gonadal failure,
respectively. Because the hypothyroidism may express before hypocalcemia is
observed (136), early surveillance of thyroid function is warranted. However,
thyroid replacement from birth does not appear to prevent the mental deficit
typical of PHP1a. In women, the hypogonadism is partial (180) so that oral
contraceptives may help regulate the menstrual cycle. Estrogen can antagonize
bone resorption leading to an exacerbation of hypocalcemia (181), but placental
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D synthesis likely obviates this effect altogether in
pregnancy so women are frequently normocalcemic at that time (182).
Abnormalities of the somatotropin axis have also been reported, with
documentation of subnormal growth hormone release following stimulation by
L-arginine or growth hormone releasing hormone (183,184). The effect of growth
hormone replacement has been investigated in a small group of pre-pubertal
PHP1a patients (185). This study concluded that the treatment is potentially
effective but has to be initiated as early as possible.

The tissue-specific silencing of the paternal Gsα allele also plays a key role
in the development of the additional hormone resistance phenotypes, as
monoallelic Gsα expression has been demonstrated in the thyroid, the ovaries,
and the pituitary (162-164,186). Studies have revealed that obesity also
develops primarily in patients who inherit the inactivating Gsα mutations from
their mothers (187). Gsα is not imprinted in the white adipose tissue (188),
but the investigations of mice in which Gsα is ablated conditionally in the
brain showed that Gsα is also monoallelic in certain parts of the hypothalamus
(189), thus explaining the imprinted mode of inheritance of the obesity
phenotype. Likewise, it has been noted that cognitive impairment, a typical AHO
feature, also develops primarily after maternal inheritance of the inactivating
Gsα mutation (190).  Go to: PHP1b

PHP1b is typically not associated with AHO or a generalized reduction in Gsα
expression (135). PHP1b patients show a defect in renal PTH signaling, but an
apparently normal response to PTH in bone. Affected individuals are therefore
functionally hypoparathyroid but show normal skeletal architecture and
development. Due to unimpaired PTH responsiveness in bone, however, signs of
hyperparathyroid bone disease (osteitis fibrosa cystica) are occasionally
observed, complicating the picture (191,192). Biochemical abnormalities
suggestive of thyroid stimulating hormone resistance are also seen in some
patients (186), and abnormalities of renal uric acid handling have been
documented (193,194). In fact, sometimes, PHP1b cases can present first with
hypothyroidism (195,196). A recent study also demonstrated short stature and
growth hormone deficiency in monozygotic twins with PHP1b (197). However,
clinically significant hormone resistance is restricted to PTH in most cases.
Because the hormone resistance is mostly limited to PTH, it was thought at one
time that these findings could be explained by a defect in the type-1
parathyroid hormone receptor (PTHR1, MIM#168468), but sequencing in PHP1b
patients found no mutations in protein-coding exons or gene promoter regions of
the gene (198-200), and studies of PHP1b families show no linkage to PTHR1
(201,202).

Most cases of PHP1b are sporadic, but a familial form of PHP1b with an apparent
autosomal dominant mode of inheritance also exists (AD-PHP1b). In four AD-PHP1b
kindreds, linkage to chromosome 20q13.3 was established, the same region which
includes the GNAS locus (201). In these families, the pattern of transmission
suggested paternal imprinting, and inheritance is therefore the same as for
PHP1a. A further 13 PHP1b subjects were studied, some of whom had bone
responsiveness to PTH (166). All lacked methylation of the alternate exon 1A,
an epigenetic defect that is postulated to inhibit expression of the functional
exon 1-containing Gsα transcript in renal tissues only (Figure 2). Thus, the
loss of methylation of the maternal exon 1A allele leads to the silencing of
the maternal as well as paternal Gsα allele, causing PTH resistance
specifically in renal proximal tubule cells. Genetic analysis indicated that
mutations in a regulatory region some distance from the GNAS coding exons were
likely to account for the unique imprinting defect(s) associated with PHP1b
(203). A search for the mutation revealed the presence of a 3 kb microdeletion
that segregated with the disease in 12 kindreds with AD-PHP1b and also occurred
in 4 sporadic cases (204). The deletion, flanked by direct repeats, removes 3
exons of the STX16 gene, which encodes syntaxin-16. Two other private deletions
within STX16 have been identified in AD-PHP1b kindreds. One removes exons 2 to
4 (205) and the other exons 2 to 8 (206). In all these cases, maternal, but not
paternal, inheritance of the STX16 deletion led to PTH resistance. Because
STX16 is apparently not imprinted (205), loss of one copy of this gene is not
predicted to underlie the PHP1b pathogenesis. Instead, these deletions
presumably disrupt a cis-acting element that controls imprinting at GNAS exon
1A. Interestingly, a study identified a large deletion ablating NESP55 without
any overlap with STX16 as the cause of PHP1b in a family in whom affected
individuals showed isolated loss of 1A methylation (207). Thus, at least two
distinct cis-acting regions appear to be necessary for the methylation imprints
at the GNAS 1A region. In two other PHP1b kindreds, nearly identical deletions
of the NESP55 DMR including exons 3 and 4 of the antisense transcript
segregated with the disease (208). In this instance, however, the 1A DMR was
not the only region to lose the differential methylation required to allow
maternal expression of Gsα in the kidney. Maternal methylation was also lost in
the regions of the XLαs and GNAS-AS1 promoters. Another kindred with these
widespread epigenetic defects of GNAS has been described (209). The affected
individuals in this kindred carried a maternally inherited deletion that
removed antisense exons 3 and 4 with flanking intronic regions but not the
NESP55 exon. Additional genomic rearrangements in the chromosomal regions
comprising GNAS have also been identified and proposed to underlie the GNAS
methylation abnormalities in some AD-PHP-Ib cases (210,211).

Sporadic PHP1b cases also show broad GNAS epigenetic defects that involve 1A.
In some of these cases, paternal uniparental disomy of different chromosome 20
segments have been reported as the likely cause of PHP1b in several such cases
(212-216). The cause of the epigenetic defects and PTH resistance, however,
remains unknown for most cases of sporadic PHP1b. A few cases have deletions
within GNAS that are de novo either in the patient or in the unaffected
mother’s paternal allele, as reported (217). Additional imprinting defects at
other genomic loci have been identified in a few patients with PHP1b (218).
Moreover, GNAS methylation defects have been identified in some cases with
hypomethylation at multiple maternally methylated imprinted regions (219,220).
In fact, some of those cases show both PTH resistance and the clinical features
resulting from the methylation changes of the other loci, such as
Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome (221).

A recent study revealed that, in addition to the exon 1A DMR, methylation at a
new GNAS region close to the GNAS-AS1 promoter (termed GNAS-AS2), is lost in
patients who carry STX16 deletions (222). Note that this region is also
affected in those cases that display broad GNAS methylation changes. The effect
of the loss of methylation at GNAS-AS2 has yet to be determined at the level of
gene expression, but this finding shows that the different subtypes of PHP-1b
are more similar to one another at the molecular level than previously
recognized. Based on one report, no clinical differences could be established
according to the pattern of GNAS epigenetic defects, although serum PTH levels
were significantly higher in females with broad GNAS methylation defects than
females with isolated loss of 1A methylation (223). A recent study also found
an intrauterine growth advantage for both AD-PHP-1b and sporadic PHP-1b cases,
but the results indicate that the sporadic cases are not as markedly growth
accelerated as AD-PHP-1b cases at birth (224).

In contradistinction to the classical understanding that AHO features are
unique to PHP1a, some studies have identified patients with PTH resistance and
AHO features who show GNAS epigenetic defects rather than Gsα coding mutations
(225-227). Thus, there may be some overlap between the clinical and molecular
features of PHP1a and PHP1b. It is possible that the AHO features observed in
patients with GNAS epigenetic defects result from a genetic mechanism that is
similar to the mechanism underlying the hormone resistance in PHP1a patients,
i.e., due to monoallelic Gsα expression in additional tissues.

A PHP1b family with a novel Gsα mutation, deletion of isoleucine-382 in the
carboxyl terminus (leading to uncoupling from the PTHR1 and isolated PTH
resistance), shows transmission through 3 generations, consistent with paternal
imprinting (228). However, such mutations within Gsα coding exons are rare
(166).

PHP1c and PHP2. Patients with PHP1c have multiple hormone resistance but normal
Gsα activity. The defect may be in other components of the receptor-adenylate
cyclase system, such as the catalytic unit, but some PHP1c cases have been
reported to carry Gsα coding mutations (229). These mutations render the Gsα
protein unable to mediate cAMP generation in response to receptor activation
but do not affect basal adenylate cyclase stimulating activity or the ability
to be activated by non-hydrolyzable GTP analogs (230-232). Thus, some forms of
PHP1c appear to be an allelic variant of PHP1a. Finally, patients with PHP2
have a normal urinary cAMP response to PTH but an impaired phosphaturic
response (233). The defect could be in the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA),
one of its substrates or targets, or in a component of the PTH-PKC signaling
pathway.

A study (234) has discovered a heterozygous mutation of the gene encoding the
regulatory subunit of PKA (PRKAR1A) in three patients with multiple hormone
resistance and acrodysostosis, a form of skeletal dysplasia that includes
severe brachydactyly type-E and other skeletal findings that resemble AHO. This
mutation, p.R368X, which leads to truncation of the COOH-terminal 14 residues,
impairs cAMP binding to the regulatory subunit, thereby blocking the activation
of PKA (234). In addition to acrodysostosis, patients carrying this mutation
display evidence for target organ resistance to PTH, thyrotropin, growth
hormone-releasing hormone, and gonadotropins, but these findings are
accompanied by elevated basal plasma and urinary cAMP levels and with an
apparently normal cAMP response to exogenous PTH administration. In certain
other patients with acrodysostosis, but mostly without hormone resistance, it
has been shown that the disease is caused by missense mutations in PDE4D, which
encodes a cAMP phosphodiesterase (235-236). The type of acrodysostosis caused
by PRKAR1A mutations has been termed acrodysostosis-1 (MIM#101800), while the
one caused by PDE4D mutations acrodysostosis-2 (MIM#614613).  Go to: Other
Phenotypes Associated with GNAS Mutations.

In contrast to the PHP phenotype associated with inactivating GNAS mutations, a
different form of sporadic bone disease, (polyostotic fibrous dysplasia)
results from de novo GNAS mutations that cause constitutive Gsα activity
(237,238). A more severe form of this disease (panostotic fibrous dysplasia)
with hyperphosphatasia and hyperphosphaturic rickets has also been described
(239,240). Patients carrying these activating mutations are mosaic for mutant
and wild-type cells, indicating that the mutation is acquired during
postzygotic development. These mutations affect the arginine residue at
position 201 (exon 8) and, rarely, the glutamine at 227 (exon 9), and inhibit
the intrinsic GTP hydrolase activity of Gsα, thereby leading to constitutive
activity. Such constitutively activating mutations of GNAS are also found in a
variety of endocrine and non-endocrine tumors, such as growth hormone-secreting
adenomas (241). A missense mutation in exon 13 (A366S) results in a Gsα protein
that is unstable at 37°C, but constitutively active at lower temperatures
(242,243). Affected patients have PHP due to PTH resistance and precocious
puberty (testotoxicosis) due to hormone-independent constitutive activation of
luteinizing hormone receptors at lower ambient temperatures in the testes.
Another Gsα mutant carrying Ala-Val-Asp-Thr amino acid repeats in the
guanine-binding domain has been described in a patient with neonatal diarrhea
and PTH resistance (244). In this instance, the mutant protein is unstable and
localized to the cytoplasm rather than plasma membrane, which explains the
hormone resistance. On the other hand, this mutation increases the rate of
GDP-GTP exchange and, thus, confers overactivity. The increased activity of Gsα
seems to be evident during the neonatal period in the gut, where the mutant
localizes to the plasma membrane, thus explaining the diarrhea phenotype.
Undoubtedly, other patterns of hormone-receptor interaction due to a GNAS
mutation await discovery.

Inactivating GNAS mutations have also been identified in patients with
congenital osteoma cutis and progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH), suggesting
that these connective tissue conditions are another variant in the phenotypic
spectrum of GNAS-related disease (245-248). No genotype-phenotype correlation
has been revealed regarding these disorders, as the same mutation can be
associated with either typical AHO features or severe ossifications that
involve deep connective tissues and skeletal muscle (249). Nonetheless,
patients with POH inherit the GNAS mutation from their fathers or acquire this
mutation de novo on the paternal GNAS allele. This parent-of-origin specific
inheritance of POH was established by analyzing 18 unrelated kindreds with this
disorder (250). In a single, three generation, kindred, the inheritance of the
mutation from males led to POH, while the inheritance of the same mutation from
females led to typical AHO. It thus appears likely that alterations in the
activity of a paternally expressed GNAS product, such as XLαs, contribute to
the pathogenesis of POH. However, POH-like features have also been seen in some
patients with maternally inherited GNAS mutations (251). A recent study
revealed that the distribution of POH lesions follow dermomyotomes and show a
tendency for one-sidedness, suggesting that post-zygotic second hits may
contribute to the development of these lesions on top of the inherited
heterozygous mutations of GNAS (252).  Differential diagnosis and genetic
counseling.

Patients with dysmorphic features resembling AHO may require careful
endocrinologic work-up to confirm and delineate the form of PHP that is
present. Similar studies of family members may also be warranted, since the
biochemical and clinical features vary within families. If PHP1a with AHO is
established, genetic counseling may aid in understanding the multisystemic
nature of the disorder, particularly in relation to the patient's growth and
development, and later-onset connective tissue complications. For either PHP1a
or PHP1b, extensive counseling may be required to adequately explain the
various implications of paternal imprinting for the parent-specific recurrence
risks in offspring. Germline mosaicism has been reported (177), which is
clearly important in assessing risks for recurrence in future sibs of a
singleton family. Given the recently described complexities in the molecular,
biochemical, and physical features of PHP1a and PHP1b, molecular testing is
critical for achieving a clear diagnosis and validating the inheritance pattern
in any given family.  Go to: THE PARATHYROID HORMONE RECEPTOR AND SKELETAL
DYSPLASIAS

PTHR1 is a family B G protein-coupled receptor that signals through multiple different G proteins including Gsα (253). It responds to two ligands, PTH and the PTH-related peptide (PTHrP). It would thus be predicted that deleterious mutations might show resistance to PTH, as well as evidence for a defect of PTHrP action. Functional polymorphisms in the PTHR1 are associated with adult height and bone mineral density (254), emphasizing the role that the receptor and its ligands play in endochondral bone formation. Inactivating or loss-of-function mutations in the PTHR1 have been implicated in the molecular pathogenesis of Blomstrand lethal chondrodysplasia (BLC; MIM#215045), and other skeletal dysplasias and dental abnormalities (255). The rare, recessive BLC is characterized by short-limbed dwarfism with craniofacial malformations, hydrops, hypoplastic lungs and aortic coarctation (256-260). The bones show accelerated endochondral ossification and deficient remodeling. The Blomstrand disease has been subdivided into type I, which refers to the severe (classical) form, and type II, which refers to a relatively milder variant, and the difference between severity is attributed to complete or incomplete inactivation of the PTHR1, respectively (261,262). A milder form of recessively inherited skeletal dysplasia, known as Eiken syndrome (MIM#600002), has also been linked to mutations of PTHR1 (263). Dominantly acting PTHR1 mutations have been identified in endochondromas of patients with enchondromatosis (Ollier's disease - MIM#166000), a familial disorder with evidence of autosomal dominance characterized by multiple benign cartilage tumors, and a predisposition to malignant osteocarcinomas (264,265). As many patients with Ollier’s disease do not have PTHR1 mutations, it is likely that the condition is genetically heterogeneous (266). Dominantly inherited symmetrical enchondromatosis is associated with duplication of 12p11.23 to 12p11.22 that includes the PTHLH gene encoding PTHrP suggesting that abnormal PTHR1 signaling may underlie this unusual form of endochondromatosis (267). In addition, some cases of autosomal dominant nonsyndromic primary failure of tooth eruption (PFE) are due to loss-of-function mutations in the PTHR1 that are dominantly acting, leading to haploinsufficiency of the receptor (268-272).

HYPOMAGNESEMIA

In humans, hypomagnesemia leads to a suppression of parathyroid hormone release
and some degree of peripheral resistance. Although the exact molecular
mechanism underlying the suppression of the parathyroid gland in hypomagnesemia
is unknown, it is important to recognize that laboratory testing in cases of
hypocalcemia with reduced PTH should include measurement of serum magnesium,
particularly in newborns (273). Primary hypomagnesemia with secondary
hypocalcemia (HSH) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by
neuromuscular symptoms in infancy due to extremely low levels of serum
magnesium and moderate to severe hypocalcemia. Homozygous mutations in the
magnesium transporter gene transient receptor potential cation channel member 6
(TRPM6) cause the disease. HSH, a potentially lethal condition, can be
misdiagnosed as primary hypoparathyroidism (274). Long-term prognosis after
treatment with high dose of oral magnesium supplementation is good.
Hypomagnesemia is also associated with long-term use of proton-pump inhibitors
that decrease the luminal pH of the intestine by acting on the enterocyte
apical TRPM6/7 channels (275,276).  Go to: MANAGEMENT OF HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

Calcium and Vitamin D. The goal of treatment in hypoparathyroid states is to
raise the serum calcium sufficiently to alleviate acute symptoms of
hypocalcemia and prevent the chronic complications (3,277,278). The calcium
concentration required for this purpose is generally the low-normal range.
Acute or severe symptomatic hypocalcemia is best treated with intravenous
calcium infusion. Initial doses of 2 to 5 millimoles of elemental calcium as
the gluconate salt can be given over a 10 to 20 minute period, followed by 2
millimoles elemental calcium per hour as a maintenance dose, to be adjusted
according to symptoms and biochemical response. Care must be taken to ensure
that the infusion does not extravasate, and ionized or total calcium levels
should be monitored frequently on a stat basis. Doses in children 5 to 14 years
of age need to be adjusted for body weight, while neonates and infants require
age-specific dosing schedules. In adults, intravenous vitamin D therapy is not
needed. Hyperphosphatemia, alkalosis and hypomagnesemia should be corrected
concomitantly if present. Post-surgical hypocalcemia is now rarely severe and
usually transient with appropriate management (279). However, the occasional
patient can represent a significant problem, particularly if the indication for
surgery is chronic hyperparathyroidism, and the post-operative hypoparathyroid
state is permanent (280). The long-term effects of standard therapy,
hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, ectopic tissue calcification
and mood changes, remain a concern (270,281).

The mainstay of chronic treatment is oral calcium and vitamin D, which should
be started as soon as possible to allow reduction and discontinuation of the
intravenous calcium. Oral calcium comes in several forms, but calcium carbonate
is generally the least expensive. A total of 20 to 80 millimoles elemental
calcium daily (2 to 8 g calcium carbonate per day) is generally effective, but
should be given in divided doses and adjusted on the basis of gastro-intestinal
tolerance, relief of hypocalcemic symptoms, and appropriate biochemical
response. Vitamin D is preferably administered as calcitriol (0.25 to 1.0
micrograms per day) but, if cost is a factor, pharmacological doses of
cholecalciferol or ergocalciferol or calcidiol may be less expensive and
equally efficacious (282). Cholecalciferol and ergocalciferol have the longest
duration of action and can result in sustained toxicity. It is therefore
appropriate to institute a starting dose of 25,000 IU/day and titrate upwards
(to 100,000 IU/daily) with assessment of serum and urinary parameters
afterwards with follow-up at 6 and 12 months, even if the patient is relatively
asymptomatic. Some authorities recommend the use of active vitamin D
(calcitriol or alphacalcidol) where possible providing the rationale that the
lack of PTH along with the tendency to hyperphosphatemia impairs the renal
conversion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to active vitamin D (277,278). In any event,
serum calcium and 24 hour urinary excretion should be carefully monitored when
therapy is started and continued until the patient is stabilized.
Hypercalciuria that occurs as treatment is initiated, even prior to the
normalization of the serum calcium, may warrant an ongoing assessment of
nephrocalcinosis, most sensitively detected by renal ultrasound. Consequently,
only a low-normal serum calcium concentration may be attainable, but many
patients feel well enough that there is no need to entirely normalize the serum
calcium. That way, the risk of renal failure due to chronic hypercalciuria −
especially problematic in patients with CASR activating mutations (6,7) − is
minimized. Nevertheless, a significant number of patients report problems with
easy fatigue and exhaustion, and mood disturbances (e.g., depression, anxiety,
hostility, and paranoid ideation) not in keeping with the degree of
hypocalcemia, suggesting that there may be non-calcitropic effects of PTH not
remedied by maintenance of normocalcemia alone (281). In an epidemiological and
health-related quality of life study from Norway, postsurgical hypoparathyroid
patients scored worse than those with nonsurgical hypoparathyroidism or
pseudohypoparathyroidism (283).

In pseudohypoparathyroidism, monitoring serum PTH levels during treatment is
critical with the aim of normalizing or reducing PTH levels as much as
possible. This is done to avoid the long-term elevation of circulating PTH,
that would likely cause bone resorption. Also, hypercalciuria as a result of
the calcitriol and calcium treatment is a lesser concern because PTH actions in
the distal tubule are functional, preventing the loss of calcium in the urine.
Of note, calcitriol (and not other forms of vitamin D) should be used for the
treatment, because the PTH resistance in the proximal tubule does not allow for
the efficient synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D from 25-hydroxyvitamin D (also see
comments above).  Go to: Hormone replacement therapy.

Hormone replacement has been advocated as a potentially superior form of
treatment for decades but only recently have preparations of recombinant human
hormone –– teriparatide (PTH 1-34) and full-length parathyroid hormone (PTH
1-84) — become available. In 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approved recombinant human (rh) PTH (1-84) for the management of
hypoparathyroidism (284). This provides an additional therapeutic option for
the management of those patients who demonstrate poor control with the standard
calcium and active vitamin D supplemental therapy. The FDA indication is for
subjects with hypoparathyroidism of any etiology, except ADH, but including
postsurgical cases. The FDA approved rhPTH(-84) with a “black box” warning
because of the history of rat osteosarcoma and PTH use (285), although no
evidence for this in primates or in clinical use has been forthcoming (286),
but did not limit the duration of use.

The use of PTH in hypoparathyroidism was demonstrated initially with the
amino-terminal fragment of PTH, teriparatide [PTH (1–34)] (287). Beneficial
control in children and in adults occurred when teriparatide was administered
daily with better control when the peptide was administered in twice-daily
dosing regimens (287-291). With a pump delivery system by which teriparatide
could be administered continuously (292,293), urinary calcium excretion fell
and markers of bone turnover normalized. A smaller daily dose was required with
pump delivery vs multiple daily dosing regimens. An open-label trial of PTH
(1–34) in adult subjects with postsurgical hypoparathyroidism showed
improvement in quality of life (294). Beneficial effects on calcium homeostasis
have also been demonstrated in specific ADH cases with activating CaSR
mutations (295,296).

The full-length PTH (1-84) represents the actual secreted product of the
parathyroid gland and its longer biological half-life (than PTH(1-34) makes
once-daily dosing feasible (297-299). Studies by several groups have noted a
substantial reduction in the requirement for calcium and active vitamin D
(300-302); only transient reductions in urinary calcium excretion (299); a
tendency for lumbar spine bone mineral density (BMD) to increase and that of
the distal one-third radius to fall (301); a rapid increase in bone turnover,
assessed by circulating markers and dynamic histomorphometric analyses of bone
that achieves a new steady state that is higher than baseline values within 2–3
years (303); and improvements in quality of life in some studies (302,304).

In a placebo-controlled 24-week clinical trial of rhPTH (1-84) in 130
hypoparathyroid patients the primary endpoints of a reduction by 50% in calcium
supplements and in active vitamin D along with maintenance of the serum calcium
were met in over half of the study subjects (305). There was a greater
percentage of subjects in whom active vitamin D could be eliminated entirely
while taking no more than 500 mg of oral calcium daily. The drug was titrated
from 50 to 100 μg/d, with just over half of the subjects needing the highest
dose. The rhPTH(1-84) reduced serum phosphate levels, improved the
calcium-phosphate product, and maintained 1,25(OH)2D and serum calcium levels
in the normal range (306). For discussion of selection and management of
patients for PTH(1-84) therapy as well as safety issues and research agenda for
the future the reader is referred to (277,278).

In the future, analogs of PTH may be useful for the treatment of
hypoparathyroidism. To facilitate their study, diphtheria toxin- and GFP-based
mouse models of acquired hypoparathyroidism have been developed (307). In each
model, a single subcutaneous injection of a long acting PTH analog increased
serum calcium levels more effectively and for a longer time than a 10-fold
greater dose of PTH(1-34) (307). Also of note is that orally active
small-molecule PTHR1 agonists are being developed for the treatment of
hypoparathyroidism. Oral administration of one such compound, PCO371, to
osteopenic rats provoked a significant increase in bone turnover with some
increase in bone mass. In hypocalcemic rats, the compound restored serum
calcium levels without increasing urinary calcium, and the effects were
stronger and longer-lasting than with PTH injections (308).  Go to:
Calcilytics.

Calcilytics – small molecule allosteric modulators of the CASR that antagonize
the calcium-sensing receptor and promote PTH secretion − are a promising
alternative for disorders with intact but hypofunctioning parathyroid glands
(309). In clinical studies in patients with ADH1, dosing with PTH(1-34) leads
to better control of blood calcium levels (288). However, PTH does not correct
the effects of the activated CASR in the kidney, and urinary calcium excretion
may not be normalized in contrast to cases of postsurgical hypoparathyroidism
(292,296). Thus while FDA approval was given for PTH treatment of
hypoparathyroidism, ADH1 was excluded from the indication.

Calcilytics which inhibit the activation of the CASR in the parathyroid and
renal tubule that promote not only PTH secretion but also renal calcium
reabsorption are therefore of potential interest for the treatment of ADH1. In
cell culture experiments studying activating CASR mutants, calcilytics
normalize the left-ward shift of the calcium response curve (310,311). The
utility of calcilytics was further demonstrated in studies of mice harboring
activating Casr mutations. In one study, two knock-in mouse models of ADH1 with
activating mutations in the Casr were generated. Daily oral administration of
the calcilytic JTT-305/MK-3442 to these mice increased serum PTH and calcium
levels, and reduced urinary calcium excretion (310). Intraperitoneal injection
of the calcilytic NPS2143 in the nuf mouse model of ADH1, transiently increased
circulating PTH and calcium levels without increasing urinary calcium levels
(311). In a preliminary clinical study, IV administration of the calcilytic
NPSP795 to five patients with ADH1 increased their plasma PTH levels and
decreased their fractional urinary calcium excretion (312). Calcilytics
comprise two main classes of compounds; the amino alcohols (e.g., NPS2143,
NPSP795, JTT-305/MK-5442) and the quinazolinones (e.g., ATF936 and AXT914)
(309). While both classes of compounds corrected the gain-of-function
properties of several of the ADH1 CASR mutations tested in vitro, a subset of
mutations involving NPS2143 binding sites within the transmembrane domain of
the CASR are not fully corrected with NPS2143 but are normalized with the
quinazolinone drugs (ATF936 and AXT914) (313-315). Whether this is reflected in
mouse model studies and clinical situations remains to be determined.

Cases of hypoparathyroidism presenting as ADH but without CASR mutations have
been found to have activating mutations of Gα11 that couples the CASR to
signaling pathways (316,317). The syndrome has been designated ADH2. Even
though Gα11 is downstream of the CASR the calcilytic NPS2143 has been shown to
rectify the altered Ca2+ signaling of the overactive mutants in in vitro
studies (318). Knock-in mice harboring an ADH2 Gα11 activating mutation
faithfully replicate ADH2 (319). Treatment with the calcilytic NPS2143 or a
Gα11/q-specific inhibitor, YM-254890 (320), increased circulating PTH and
calcium levels in the heterozygous mutant mice (319), Thus, calcilytics, by
blocking the renal CASR, are potentially of use to treat ADH1 and ADH2, and
Gq/11 inhibitors to treat ADH2 as well as other forms of hypoparathyroidism.

Other therapies.

If the serum calcium attainable with oral calcium and calcitriol is below the
normal range and the patient remains symptomatic, then a trial of a thiazide
diuretic may be considered, with the aim of reducing the hypercalciuria to
raise the serum calcium further. The argument for efficacy seems greatest for
responsive forms of autosomal dominant hypocalcemia due to activating CaSR
mutations, since the thiazide-sensitive transporter, SLC12A3 (MIM#600968), is a
downstream target of and is suppressed by activated CaSR in the kidney. For
reasons that are not clear, however, thiazides work well in some patients (321)
but not others. It is critical to monitor serum potassium and magnesium levels
as thiazide use can lead to renal losses of these cations with resulting
hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia. Some authorities suggest thiazides should not
be used in APS1 patients with adrenal insufficiency and in ADH1 patients with
Bartter syndrome type V (277,278).

As the serum calcium is normalized, elevated serum phosphate concentrations
generally decline but phosphate-binding gels such as aluminum hydroxide are
occasionally helpful in reducing hyperphosphatemia at the beginning of therapy.

In patients with intracranial calcifications, patients may experience seizures
related to chronic neuropathic changes and it may be necessary to add
appropriate anti-epileptic medication(s). In all chronically hypocalcemic
patients, ocular assessments should be performed periodically.
